README.md, before:

# DUDe - Dummy User Directory

![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-Apache--2.0-blue.svg?style=flat-square)
![Python](https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-3.9.6-blue?style=flat-square)

---

## Presentation

The DUDe is an attempt of creating an easy and very simplistic user access management tool.  
It's so simplistic that in fact, it **should not be used** in production. Like never.

I created it to fill a need but also as an intellectual challenge (whatever it means 😀).

## Architecture

The micro-service runs on Flask/Gunicorn and is powered by a SQLite database.  
The whole "stuff" is revolving around these seven tables:

``` mermaid
classDiagram
Company <|-- Unit
Unit <|-- Team
Team <|-- User
Team <|-- Software
Team <|-- Right
User <|-- UserRight
Right <|-- UserRight
```

> **Company**  
> This is the main entity where all other entities are regrouped.  
> For example, *ACME Corp* is a good name for a company.

> **Unit**  
> This is a logical unit within the company. A company as one or more units.  
> For example, *HR*, *Marketing* or *IT* are units.

> **Team**  
> A unit is composed of several teams working together towards a same goal.  
> For example, in the *Marketing* unit, we can have *Press* and *Social Media* as teams.

> **User**  
> A user belongs to a team and perform duties / operations on its behalf.  
> John and Sarah are part of the 'Social Media' team.

> **Right**  
> On behalf of their team, user can perform some actions with an application which is also 
> depending on their right to do so.  
> For example, *read*, *write* or *publish* might be some doable actions for 'Social Media' team members.

> **Software**  
> A software is the application that will interogate the micro-service to retrieve the authorized 
> action that a user can perform.  
> For example, 'Social Media' team as a software called 'StoryBuilder' that allows its user to 
> read, write or publish stories on Instagram.

> **UserRight**  
> This is the table that is queried by the micro-service and that associates a user with its rights.  
> For example, John can read or write stories, but only Sarah is entitled to publish them.


## A (tiny) bit of security

We are in 2022, and unless you were living under a rock for the past 20 years, we will secure the communication with SSL.  
A Makefile is present in the *certs* directory to help you create a root certificate and a server certificate.  
And yes, it's a self signed certificate, which is bad, but it's sufficient for testing.

1. Create the root certificate

``` bash
$ cd certs
$ make server_cert
```

2. Create the server certificate

By default the server certificate will be named '**my_dev_site.cert.pem**'.  
You can override this value by setting the environment variable *SERVER_NAME* before calling make.

``` bash
# use the standard name 
$ make server_cert

# use a different name
$ make SERVER_NAME=let_me_in server_cert
```

After some time, you should have a directory with several files in it:

```
.
├── Makefile                        # that's our boy
├── my_dev_site.cert.pem            # server certificate
├── my_dev_site.key.pem             # server key
└── root
    ├── root_ca.cert.pem            # root certificate
    ├── root_ca.cert.srl            # <- you can trash this one
    └── root_ca.key.pem             # root key
```

⛔️ Don't forget that you must **NEVER** disclose your root key and certificate to anyone.

In case you want a good primer on OpenSSL Certificate Authority, you can have a look [here](https://jamielinux.com/docs/openssl-certificate-authority/).


>❗️ **IMPORTANT**  
If you change the name of the certificate, you will have to update the gunicorn configuration in 'server/gunicorn.conf.py'.  
This is not ideal and I should probably use an environment variable for that.

## Starting the server

1. First thing first, you need to install the Python dependencies for this project.  

``` bash
$ pip install -r requirements.txt
```

2. Define environment variable DUDE_SECRET_KEY

This variable is used by the server to protect administrative endpoints.  
The value should be present in the HTTP header (X-API-Token) otherwise the action is refused.  
A good way to create one, is to use *OpenSSL*:

``` bash
# generate a 20 char. hexadecimal string
$ export DUDE_SECRET_KEY=$(openssl rand -hex 20)
```

Then you can run the server:

``` bash
$ cd server
$ gunicorn
```
If the SSL certificates are available, they will be automatically loaded by gunicorn.

## Testing the server

You can test the server by using the '/version' endpoint and curl.

``` bash
$ curl --cacert certs/root/root_ca.cert.pem https://localhost:5000/version
{
  "version": "1.0.0"
}
```

If you receive the version, that means the connection is working.

## API Endpoints

The endpoints are described in a OpenAPI 3.0 document available [here](./docs/dude.openapi.yml).  
You can import this file into [Postman](https://www.postman.com/) and it can create automatically a collection from it.

### Validating rights

1. Retrieve an authentication token

To validate a user's right, you first need to retrieve an authentication token.  
To do so, you query the **/auth** endpoint with the name and the api-key of the software that performs the check.  
If both parameters are valid, the API will answer with a token.

2. Validating user's right

With the token, you can now validate the user's right by querying the **/validate** endpoint.

## Libraries

To integrate the DUDe to your application, there is a library in Python ([py-DUDe](https://github.com/oaxley/py-DUDe)).  
I'm planning to do the same in Rust soon (rs-DUDe) when I will have some time.



---

## License

his program is under the **Apache License 2.0**.  
A copy of the license is available [here](https://choosealicense.com/licenses/apache-2.0/).

Commit message:

Add the creation of the virtual environment during setup

README.md, after:

# DUDe - Dummy User Directory

![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-Apache--2.0-blue.svg?style=flat-square)
![Python](https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-3.9.6-blue?style=flat-square)

---

## Presentation

The DUDe is an attempt of creating an easy and very simplistic user access management tool.  
It's so simplistic that in fact, it **should not be used** in production. Like never.

I created it to fill a need but also as an intellectual challenge (whatever it means 😀).

## Architecture

The micro-service runs on Flask/Gunicorn and is powered by a SQLite database.  
The whole "stuff" is revolving around these seven tables:

``` mermaid
classDiagram
Company <|-- Unit
Unit <|-- Team
Team <|-- User
Team <|-- Software
Team <|-- Right
User <|-- UserRight
Right <|-- UserRight
```

> **Company**  
> This is the main entity where all other entities are regrouped.  
> For example, *ACME Corp* is a good name for a company.

> **Unit**  
> This is a logical unit within the company. A company as one or more units.  
> For example, *HR*, *Marketing* or *IT* are units.

> **Team**  
> A unit is composed of several teams working together towards a same goal.  
> For example, in the *Marketing* unit, we can have *Press* and *Social Media* as teams.

> **User**  
> A user belongs to a team and perform duties / operations on its behalf.  
> John and Sarah are part of the 'Social Media' team.

> **Right**  
> On behalf of their team, user can perform some actions with an application which is also 
> depending on their right to do so.  
> For example, *read*, *write* or *publish* might be some doable actions for 'Social Media' team members.

> **Software**  
> A software is the application that will interogate the micro-service to retrieve the authorized 
> action that a user can perform.  
> For example, 'Social Media' team as a software called 'StoryBuilder' that allows its user to 
> read, write or publish stories on Instagram.

> **UserRight**  
> This is the table that is queried by the micro-service and that associates a user with its rights.  
> For example, John can read or write stories, but only Sarah is entitled to publish them.


## A (tiny) bit of security

We are in 2022, and unless you were living under a rock for the past 20 years, we will secure the communication with SSL.  
A Makefile is present in the *certs* directory to help you create a root certificate and a server certificate.  
And yes, it's a self signed certificate, which is bad, but it's sufficient for testing.

1. Create the root certificate

``` bash
$ cd certs
$ make server_cert
```

2. Create the server certificate

By default the server certificate will be named '**my_dev_site.cert.pem**'.  
You can override this value by setting the environment variable *SERVER_NAME* before calling make.

``` bash
# use the standard name 
$ make server_cert

# use a different name
$ make SERVER_NAME=let_me_in server_cert
```

After some time, you should have a directory with several files in it:

```
.
├── Makefile                        # that's our boy
├── my_dev_site.cert.pem            # server certificate
├── my_dev_site.key.pem             # server key
└── root
    ├── root_ca.cert.pem            # root certificate
    ├── root_ca.cert.srl            # <- you can trash this one
    └── root_ca.key.pem             # root key
```

⛔️ Don't forget that you must **NEVER** disclose your root key and certificate to anyone.

In case you want a good primer on OpenSSL Certificate Authority, you can have a look [here](https://jamielinux.com/docs/openssl-certificate-authority/).


>❗️ **IMPORTANT**  
If you change the name of the certificate, you will have to update the gunicorn configuration in 'server/gunicorn.conf.py'.  
This is not ideal and I should probably use an environment variable for that.

## Starting the server

1. First thing first, you need to install the Python dependencies for this project.  

To ensure the installation does not messed up with your current Python installation, you can create a virtualenv:

``` bash
$ python3 -m venv --prompt DUDe venv
```
This create a new virtual environment in the venv directory.

Activate the new environment and install the dependencies:

``` bash
$ source venv/bin/activate
(DUDe) $ pip install -r requirements.txt
```

2. Define environment variable DUDE_SECRET_KEY

This variable is used by the server to protect administrative endpoints.  
The value should be present in the HTTP header (X-API-Token) otherwise the action is refused.  
A good way to create one, is to use *OpenSSL*:

``` bash
# generate a 20 char. hexadecimal string
$ export DUDE_SECRET_KEY=$(openssl rand -hex 20)
```

Then you can run the server:

``` bash
$ cd server
$ gunicorn
```
If the SSL certificates are available, they will be automatically loaded by gunicorn.

## Testing the server

You can test the server by using the '/version' endpoint and curl.

``` bash
$ curl --cacert certs/root/root_ca.cert.pem https://localhost:5000/version
{
  "version": "1.0.0"
}
```

If you receive the version, that means the connection is working.

## API Endpoints

The endpoints are described in a OpenAPI 3.0 document available [here](./docs/dude.openapi.yml).  
You can import this file into [Postman](https://www.postman.com/) and it can create automatically a collection from it.

### Validating rights

1. Retrieve an authentication token

To validate a user's right, you first need to retrieve an authentication token.  
To do so, you query the **/auth** endpoint with the name and the api-key of the software that performs the check.  
If both parameters are valid, the API will answer with a token.

2. Validating user's right

With the token, you can now validate the user's right by querying the **/validate** endpoint.

## Libraries

To integrate the DUDe to your application, there is a library in Python ([py-DUDe](https://github.com/oaxley/py-DUDe)).  
I'm planning to do the same in Rust soon (rs-DUDe) when I will have some time.



---

## License

his program is under the **Apache License 2.0**.  
A copy of the license is available [here](https://choosealicense.com/licenses/apache-2.0/).
